Welcome to the next
week of our course
on parallel functional
programming with Java.
Now that we've finished our
coverage of Java sequential
streams, we can finally
turn our attention
to Java parallel streams, which
is the first of several Java
parallels and frameworks
we cover in this course.
This week's lessons start
by outlining the structure
and functionality of a parallel
stream, which partitions a data
source into multiple
chunks, processes
these chunks in a
pool of threads,
and combines the results
of this parallel processing
into a final, reduced result.
A key benefit of the
Java streams framework
is its ability to automatically
and transparently map behaviors
in a parallel stream to
multiple processor cores
without requiring
programmers to spawn threads
explicitly or even apply
synchronization mechanisms,
in many cases.
In fact, converting a sequential
stream to a parallel stream
often just requires
minuscule changes,
such as replacing a call
to the stream factory
method or the call to the
parallel stream factory method.
This week's lessons visualize
and demonstrate the simplicity
of converting
sequential-to-parallel streams
in the context of the search
stream [? gang ?] case study.
This case study
underscores the fact
that all the
aggregate operations
we covered in prior weeks'
work will work seamlessly
with parallel streams.
Not surprisingly,
however, the three phases
of a parallel stream
operate somewhat differently
than a sequential stream.
This week's lessons,
therefore, give an overview
of parallel streams'
internals, which
are particularly important
to understand when developing
performance-critical Java
programs on modern multicore
processors.
In particular, we examine
how the streams framework
first invokes predefined or
user-defined spliterators
to partition a data source
into multiple chunks.
We next show how these chunks
are processed in parallel
by running the streams
intermediate operations
in the Java common
fork-joint pool.
Finally, we outline how the
streams framework uses terminal
operations like collect together
with predefined or user-defined
collectors the join partial
sub-results into a final,
reduced result. To maximize
the performance of the Java
parallel streams framework, it's
important to know which aspects
of these phases can be
controlled and which can't.
So we walked through
many code examples
to illustrate key points.